>> This is "Nuevo", the
mysteries of the Martian moon
Phobos and the probes
Phobos 1 and Phobos 2.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Gaia presents "Nuevo"
with Jaime Maussan.
>> On March 27, 1989, the
Martian probe Phobos 2 became
lost after taking a photograph
showing an object considered
by the Russian scientists,
such as Marina Popovich,
to be 20 to 25
kilometers in size.
Previous to that incident,
the Phobos 2 probe
had taken pictures of Mars
where the same immense shadow
had appeared.
After taking these
images, especially
the last one of them, the Phobos
2 probe mysteriously vanished.
All contact with the
probe simply stopped.
Mission control no
longer received signals
from the probe.
It wasn't there anymore.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It was determined
after further study,
the size of the shadow or object
that caused the shadow that was
captured in the Mars photo
was more than 30 kilometers
in height--
a huge object,
30,000 meters long.
This report was
featured and shown
on Soviet television, a
very mysterious occurrence.
More than 25 years ago, we
conducted an investigation
into this extraordinary case.
And were even able to find
the original report that
was shown on Soviet television.
This was a very
important achievement
considering the censorship that
existed in the Soviet Union
before the fall of
the Iron Curtain.
Here are details from
that original report.
On March 27, 1989,
flight controllers
lost contact with the small
probe located more than 180
million kilometers from Earth.
Phobos 2 was in orbit around
Mars when it disappeared.
According to the
official story, the probe
became lost when turning to
photograph the Phobos moon.
Apparently, it could not
reorient itself, and vanished.
For the controllers at the Space
Center in the former Soviet
Union, it was incomprehensible
that Phobos was missing.
After orbiting
Mars several times
and obtaining some of the
best photographs ever taken
of the Red Planet,
it had unaccountably,
stopped transmitting.
This multinational project had
been seriously compromised.
And the disappearance
of the probe
was an embarrassment
to the Soviets.
The world would
question the capability
of the Soviet scientists because
of the inexplicable omission
failure.
Especially after the
mysterious photographs
had been viewed by the world.
These photographs
showed a huge shadow
projected onto the Martian
surface, a shadow of 27
or 28 kilometers.
It was as if a very large
object behind the probe--
that is, between the
probe and the sun--
had projected this
mysterious shadow
onto the surface of Mars.
The shadow had been
photographed twice
by the two available
cameras on the ship that
were equipped with infrared
spectrum and normal spectrum
systems.
Each camera was programmed
to take pictures
every eight hours.
After taking the last
picture of Phobos,
an elliptical
object was detected
moving towards the satellite
probe seconds before it failed.
Indications were that
the elliptical object
had attacked the satellite,
which was now dead
and left spinning
out of control.
The Phobos 2 probe
simply disappeared.
Here is a video of the original
report that was broadcast
on TV in the Soviet Union.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> We have some extraordinary
news tonight that has been
the subject of a lot of
talk from Western reporters.
The interplanetary
station Phobos
1, the satellite that
has been orbiting Mars,
has suffered a catastrophe.
And the international
program between 14 countries
has been compromised.
Now let's look at the facts.
The Phobos program
consisted of three parts.
The first was the initial
flight of the spacecraft
that blasted off from
Earth on its way to Mars.
And during that voyage,
solar wind would be studied.
The second stage was the
study and exploration of Mars
from the spacecraft.
Now, here is a beautiful
detailed photograph
that was taken by the
Soviet spacecraft.
Images that have
never before been seen
by any person or scientist.
So the third story
here to consider
was the loss of the
spacecraft, Phobos 1.
We have now received news that
after the photographic images
were taken, Phobos 1 veered
off its projected track.
And the link to the controllers
at the Soviet Space Command
was lost.
Today, we happened to
be filming in the Flight
Center on a
different assignment,
and we were able
to film firsthand,
scientists trying to
communicate with Phobos 1
and bring it back to life.
Now we'd like to
show you the film
that many Soviet
research centers
are trying to understand.
This is it.
What you're seeing here is a
shot of the surface of Mars.
This is a beautiful
image from a thermal map.
And here's a line almost
20 kilometers long,
that was unexpectedly
discovered.
It can be seen in
this area here,
that's visible to the naked eye.
The line ends in this
inexplicable formation.
Now, here's what the specialists
are saying about this story
as it unfolds.
We've asked ourselves
what areas of the planet
they saw in the photographs
that were received.
Were they infrared
or visible areas?
Some maps of Mars already
exist-- like this Mars atlas
map.
And on this map,
it's possible to see
with areas Phobos photographed.
>> This first series
is the closest one.
Here, we obtained the
most detailed images
that helped us create this map.
Here, other colors
are displayed.
There are three other series
of images that were recently
taken of the surface of Mars.
>> This red color on the map,
is this just a coincidence?
>> Yes, it's coincidental.
Red Planet, red map.
The photograph for this
map was taken several days
before the unexplained lost
spacecraft situation happened.
>> But even if the people who
designed and constructed Phobos
1 explained what happened, is
it possible to say that they
received inexplicable
results, but at the same time,
new and incredible information?
>> Yes, what you're talking
about is visible in the shot.
However, we believe
an optical phenomenon
like this is not
yet explainable.
>> So what part of
the planet is this?
Is this what we're
talking about?
>> Well, here in this place--
as you can see--
in this area on the map and
here, starting about here
and ending over here,
this strip measure
is somewhere between
20 and 25 kilometers.
And is visible in the
optical and infrared zone.
The satellite shots
were taken the same day,
but every eight
hours, twice a day,
eight hours apart-- you see.
In addition, here and right
here, this strip is visible.
There's also another
shape in some
of these photographs, a shape
that is quite easy to see,
measuring between 26
and 30 kilometers.
It's a shadow or
shape of some kind,
but it differs from this strip.
It's shorter, a little narrower.
And has a different shape,
which is visible only
in the two shots received in the
optical and infrared zone that
were taken at about
midnight, 12:00 AM
in the morning-- you see.
>> So the most important thing
is that in the previous maps,
these shapes or shadows
were not visible?
>> Correct.
No shapes are visible
on the screen.
>> Well, the shadow
appeared unexpectedly.
We didn't understand it.
And we didn't really pay
much attention to it.
Because it appears again later.
In the next series of shots,
it was even less visible.
But it was there, nonetheless.
In another area of the
shots it was also observed,
although to a lesser extent.
>> So it was a shadow on the
surface, rather than an object?
>> Probably.
Because this shadow, it
is not completely obscure
or cover this area or
the surface of Mars.
>> This looks like a remarkable
image that was taken when
the satellite passed
over Mars, correct?
What do you think about it?
>> Well, it is
quite fantastical,
but it could be possible.
We see it in a
coherent and real way.
Although whatever caused the
shadow is not easily explained.
It's more likely to be the
shadow of an object in the area
because the surface of the
shadows tail is translucent.
You can see through it.
Also, the concentration of
the image is hard to decipher.
What I'm saying is that
in order to understand it,
it will be necessary to carry
out scientific analysis.
This phenomenon or
unexplained singular image
is the same as what
you saw before.
But you have to be very
careful since any spectacle
of this type requires
deep analysis
and study by our scientists.
And only then, will it be
possible to better understand
what we are looking at here.
[PLAYBACK ENDS]
>> Concerning the disappearance
of the Phobos 2 probe,
they had no explanation for the
loss of control of the probe.
Soviet scientists would not
consider another possibility.
One that suggests that the probe
had been hijacked or destroyed
by intelligences
alien to our planet.
Consider the fact that many
nations had participated
economically in a project
that should have produced
a large amount of
data about Mars,
especially data about
the Martian moon Phobos.
In early research,
Phobos had attracted
the attention of
Soviet researchers,
especially of the
Cydonia region,
after carrying out
a mapping of Mars.
Phobos 2 should
have landed on Mars
to perform various analysis
of the strange planet.
However, only a few days
after entering orbit
around the planet,
the craft disappeared,
preventing the mission
from being carried out.
On March 27, 1989, it was
declared officially lost.
Something had happened to it.
Something very
strange had happened
to Phobos 2, more than 1,800,000
kilometers from the Earth.
Its twin, Phobos 1, was also
lost on its trip to Mars.
This had happened previously,
on September 1, 1988.
Apparently, due to a data
transmission failure,
the scientists had
sent it off route.
And it had been lost in space.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In 1991, the Russian
cosmonaut Marina Popovich
unveiled extraordinary
evidence that
could possibly explain the
disappearance of the space
probe Phobos 2.
The evidence was the last
photograph taken by the Phobos
2 probe before disappearing.
In the image, there
is an object measuring
approximately 25 kilometers
in length, floating in space
near the moon of Phobos.
After taking the picture
and examining it,
the object mysteriously
disappeared.
The strange events that
occurred on the Phobos mission
would remain unnoticed
by Western scientists,
until cosmonaut Marina
Popovich unveiled
the final photograph
obtained by Phobos 2
before its long
object disappeared.
An official photograph from
the Russian Space Agency
in early December of 1991
exposed the evidence,
which shows a large object,
almost 30 kilometers long,
very close to the
moon of Phobos.
Despite the weight of this
evidence, the public at large
was unaware of it.
Dr. James Harder, renowned
researcher from the United
States, explains what happened.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> I'm Dr. James Harder.
And I first saw this
picture last week,
when Marina showed
it to a conference.
And at a press conference
at the Soviet Embassy,
she released this
for the first time,
essentially, to the press.
It's the third picture taken
by the Martian probe Phobos 2.
This was the last picture taken.
There is an object
that appears to be
in the vicinity of
Phobos, but it could be,
of course, smaller
and much closer.
And the interesting thing
is that after having made it
through all of the high
G-Forces of launch,
having made it through a
year's worth of time and space,
that it should
suddenly disappear
or at least, disappear
from radio contact
after it took this rather
interesting photograph.
>> What it is for you?
>> Well, all we can say is
that it's an unknown object,
but it's very likely to be real.
I don't think you can exhaust
all of the other possibilities
that it's some
kind of a mistake,
or if it's some kind
of transmission error,
or if it's a hoax.
None of those things.
>> Do know that there are other
pictures of Mars where you can
see a very long shadow, a shadow
of probably 20 kilometers long?
>> I've heard of the shadow.
I've not seen it.
But of course,
from what you say,
this object could have
left that kind of a shadow.
The length of this
object, if it's
at the same distance as Phobos,
would be about 15 miles.
So I think, it's a
rather simple picture,
but it doesn't
have an explanation
of any natural sort.
>> It's very important.
>> I think it's important
because if it's not a hoax,
and I don't think it is a
hoax because it came from
the highest people in the
Soviet Space Agency who gave it
to Marina.
It doesn't look
like it's anything
that could be a transmission
error or an error
in the photographic technique.
And if it's not a hoax
and it's not a mistake,
it's definitely unknown.
And definitely unexplained.
[PLAYBACK ENDS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In December 1991, we
met with Marina Popovich,
who showed us the
strange object.
And gave us her own explanation
of this extraordinary case.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And when he approached
Mars, the spacecraft?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We have here,
the last picture--
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> So when he approached Mars
and it was close to the Mars.
And here we can see
a Phobos satellite.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And on this picture--
this one of the last
pictures we can see--
here, strange objects.
And also, one of the
pictures show a big shadow
on the surface of the Mars.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And the right after three
days as this picture was
received, the signal's
connection with Phobos 2 was
lost.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> There's a lot of ideas
why this spacecraft appeared.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> One of the ideas,
it was maybe also,
there was a bad command
or some kind of mistakes.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Maybe it was in connection
with a static electricity.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Or something went wrong with
the electrical equipment inside
of the spacecraft.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Maybe mechanical, kind of.
>> But scientists that
investigates UFO subjects claim
that these traces are the
other traces probably belongs
to the spacecraft.
>> Maybe, maybe.
>> Maybe, other spacecraft
belongs to the other
civilization.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> So it can be a reason
why it disappeared.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Because this size, the
length of this object,
this cigar-shaped object is
around 20, 25 kilometers.
[PLAYBACK ENDS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Phobos is one of two
moons of the planet Mars.
And is the only satellite
in the solar system
that doesn't seem to be
synchronized with the planet.
In fact, it is the only
one that has a shorter
day than the world it orbits.
Phobos does a
complete orbit of Mars
in seven hours and 32 minutes.
So on a Martian day, it is able
to come out and disappear twice
in one day.
It is also known that
Phobos constantly
accelerates and decreases
its speed, which
is an unique feature
in the solar system.
It is approximately
37 kilometers wide.
And has a retrograde
orbit, meaning
that it orbits in the
opposite direction
to that of most natural
satellites in the solar system.
To sum, the shape of Phobos
looks like a potato in space.
And its orbit is very irregular,
approaching and moving away
from Mars.
Here, we see some truly amazing
images captured by several NASA
missions.
These photographs
led scientists,
such as the Soviet
astrophysicist
Iosif Shklovsky to speculate
that Phobos was artificially
created and put into orbit.
In a radio address
in 1959, he commented
that, "based on
recent observations,
we must conclude that it is
highly likely that Phobos
and the second moon
of Mars, Deimos,
are artificial satellites
placed in orbit
by an unknown race that
inhabited Mars 2 or 3
million years ago."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Everyone knew that the
Phobos-Grunt mission
was an ambitious
and risky endeavor.
If it had been able
to complete its task,
it would have marked the return
of Russia to space exploration.
It could have been a
triumph for Russia,
especially after a dozen
unsuccessful missions
to the Red Planet.
To have brought back
samples of Phobos to Earth
would have been a remarkable
scientific achievement.
Among the planned
experiments, the ship
was transporting a capsule
full of microorganisms prepared
by the Planetary
Society, to investigate
the effects of extended space
travel on living organisms.
Another of the mysteries
of this Martian moon
was the discovery of a
monolith that measured
over 90 meters in height.
According to NASA
and other scientists,
there had to be a
natural explanation
for its presence there.
It is said to be a very
large, monolithic rock.
However, there are no
similar examples in our world
that would explain why
a rock of this size
stands erect in the middle
of the desert of Phobos.
This monolith is truly,
an unidentified mystery.
The monolith was observed from
the photographs taken in 1998,
by the Mars Global
Surveyor mission.
In this photo, you can
see the huge monolith
that is 90 meters
high, in an area where
there are no other protrusions
or rocks of its type.
Its existence on Phobos is
incredible, to say the least.
The images have
led some to believe
that it was
constructed and erected
by an extraterrestrial
civilization.
This monolith is another
unexplained theory
surrounding the Red Planet.
It is even more
mysterious that there
is a similar monolith on Mars.
This photograph
released in 2009 was
taken by an orbital
mission of the Red Planet,
and shows something similar
to the monolith located
on Mars moon Phobos.
NASA has maintained that
this image was obtained
by the HiRISE camera that was
on board the Mars Reconnaissance
Orbiter.
HiRISE is an acronym for High
Resolution Imaging Science
Experiment Camera.
The HiRISE camera took the
pictures 165 miles above Mars
by the Reconnaissance Orbiter.
And establishes that
the rock formation
has a monolithic shape,
similar to the one on Phobos.
This high resolution,
$40 million camera
confirms the fact
that the monolith
has a rectangular shape.
And seems to resemble
the black monolith that
appears during key
moments of man's evolution
in the Stanley
Kubrick film, "2001--
A Space Odyssey."
Interest on the monolith
circulated on social networks,
and begs to ask the
question, is the presence
of this monolith proof
that there was once
life on the Red Planet?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It is evident to us that
neither or both monoliths were
formed naturally.
Astronaut Buzz Aldrin, the
second man to walk on the moon,
alluded to the monolith
detected on Phobos in 2009.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> We should go boldly where
man has not gone before.
Fly by the comets.
Visit asteroids.
Visit the moon of Mars.
There's a monolith, a
very unusual structure
on this little potato-shaped
object that goes around Mars
once in seven hours.
When people find out about
that, they're going to say,
who put that there?
Who put that there?
Well, the universe put it there.
If you choose, God put it there.
[PLAYBACK ENDS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It is bizarre that the
monolith is in the middle
of a totally flat and
desert area of Mars.
And that this rock has
remained untouched by erosion
for thousands of years.
According to estimates,
it could have
a height of around 90 meters.
NASA scientists claim that
that size estimate is distorted
and probably inaccurate.
Another theory says that
the Phobos monolith was not
formed during extraneous
impact, but could
be a piece of solid
lunar rock extending
through the surface that is
mostly covered with debris.
That idea was discussed years
ago by planetary scientists who
were exploring the
idea of carrying out
a mission to Phobos.
If the hypothesis
is true, it would
mean that the
monolith could contain
clues about the origins
of Phobos itself.
This leaves a third
idea up in the air,
that Mars suffered
a devastating impact
with a huge protoplanet,
a planetary embryo
billions of years ago, which
created the two moons that we
have named, Phobos and Deimos.
It is believed that a
similar type of collision
led to the creation
of Earth's moon.
But our moon is large,
and Phobos and Deimos
are quite small.
Such an impact should have given
Mars a much larger satellite.
However, a couple of
studies published in 2016
might have solved the mystery.
Both concluded that the
third idea is correct.
And while one says
that the moons are not
trapped asteroids,
the second establishes
a detailed hypothesis that
can explain how Mars ended up
having two small moons.
Apparently, a huge impact on
Mars generated a large moon.
And that great moon
split, and gave rise
to the formation of
Phobos and Deimos.
And left many other satellite
objects from the debris.
And finally, the great
moon, and everything
except the two small moons,
Phobos and Deimos, survived.
Other pieces disintegrated or
crashed to the Martian surface.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> However, some expeditions
that had been proposed
to analyze the composition of
Phobos and its monolith could
test the idea that it is not
a natural moon, but really,
a hollow moon.
However, time is of the essence.
In 2015, NASA suggested that
Phobos is disintegrating little
by little.
The furrows of its surface could
be early signs of this process.
Luckily, there is
still a lot of time
to visit Phobos before it dies.
It will take 30 to 50
million years for it
to completely disintegrate.
On the next episode
of "Nuevo", we
analyze other strange
structures that
have been photographed
on Mars that
suggest the possibility
of intelligent presence
on the planet.
I am Jaime Maussan,
and I will see you
on the next episode of "Nuevo."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Gaia presented "Nuevo"
with Jaime Maussan.